---
title: "multishift guide"
---
{% include head.html %}


# What is multishift for?
A common technique for investigating dislocations, stacking faults, and slip planes in crystals involves the calculation of $$\gamma$$-surface energies.
The software provided in the `multishifter` toolbox facilitate the creation of crystal structures for calculations of UBER curves and surface energies along arbitrary slip planes.
The `multishifter` libraries also have tools aid in the construction of twisted bilayers to create periodic Moir&#233; structures.

# Basic usage
The `multishift` executable is a suite of command line tools that can manipulate and create crystal structures for slab model calculations.
Each tool is specialized to complete a particular task, and accepts arguments either directly from the command line.
Input and output files of crystal structures use the [VASP](https://www.vasp.at/wiki/index.php/POSCAR) format.

A typical use case example is the calculation of a $$\gamma$$-surface, which requires generating slab structures that have been shifted along a particular crystallographic plane. 
Starting from a primitive structure, several steps must be taken to create the slab models, each accomplished using a `multishifter` tool:
1. Slice the primitive structure to expose the desired surface plane (`slice`).
2. Specify the thickness of the slabs (`stack`).
3. Rigidly translate the basis of the slab, to expose the desired atomic layer (`translate`).
4. Generate set of shifted slab structures, one for each point on the $$\gamma$$-surface (`shift`).

Each of these commands takes the form
```bash
multishift <command> --args
```

[comment]: <> TODO: How do you do it with ini file? (I think you just don't)

# Feature overview
`multishift` comes as a collection of tools, each meant to manipulate crystal structures a particular way.

## slice
`multishift slice` will create a supercell of a primitive cell that exposes a particular slip plane.

### Parameters
- input: path to starting structure
- output: output file path
- millers: defines slip plane

## multishift-base
The `multishift-base` tool will create a supercell of a primitive cell that exposes a particular slip plane.
Energy surface calculations involve creating large slabs along a particular slip plane, and shifting the slabs past each other.
These slab structures are supercells of the primitive structure that have been constructed such that the ab-vectors of the slab lattice span the slip plane, while the c-vector is arbitrarily large and determines the thickness of the slab.

### Settings values
Use **base** as the settings key. Options are:
- prim: Path to the primitive structure (VASP format).
- millers: Array of 3 integers that specify the slip plane.
- slab_floor_index: The entire basis of the slab structure will be translated such that the atom with this index ends up on the very bottom (0 means no translation).
- stacks: Integer specifying how thick the slab should be, which is constructed by stacking the smallest possible unit that exposes the slip plane along the c-direction.

## multishift-shift
`multishift-shift` can create structures for both UBER curves and $$\gamma$$-surfaces.
Given a structure for a slab, this tool will modify by either changing amount of space perpendicular to the slip plane (for UBER calculations), shifting the periodic images of the slab along the slip plane ($$\gamma$$-surface), or both.
Once the shifts have been created, a `record.json` file is saved, which relates shift values to the associated structure.

### Settings values
Use **shift** as the settings key. Options are:
- slab: Path to the slab structure that you want to create UBER or $$\gamma$$-surface calculations for.
- a: Number of grid points along the a-vector for the $$\gamma$$-surface
- b: Number of grid points along the b-vector for the $$\gamma$$-surface
- cleavage: List of values in $$\AA$$ of space that should be inserted between the slabs.

## multishift-fourier
`multishift-fourier` can reconstruct values at each shift grid-point in terms of plane waves, yielding a smooth periodic function.
Given a set of data in the form of `record.json`, and a reference lattice in the form of a VASP structure, a Fourier transform is applied to the specified fields in the data file, and the Fourier coefficients are saved into `interpolator.json` files.
These interpolator files can then be used to regenerate the periodic values (e.g. $$\gamma$$-surface) at an arbitrary resolution.

### Settings values
Use **fourier** as the settings key. Options are:
- data: `json` file with values that should be expressed in terms of plane waves.
This file should be the same as `record.json`, generated by `multishift-shift`, with additional entries for the values to interpolate.
- lattice: VASP structure file that determines the value of the fractional shifts in the data file.
This is most likely `final_slab.vasp`, generated by `multishift-base`.
- values: List of entries in the data file, which should be interpolated.

# Tutorials
[Tutorial I: Creating a slab structure](./tutorials/i/)<br/>
[Tutorial II: UBER of a layered structure](./tutorials/ii/)<br/>
[Tutorial III: A $$\gamma$$-surface for Li](./tutorials/iii)<br/>
[Tutorial IV: A better $$\gamma$$-surface for Mg]()<br/>
